
What impacts a used car price? - A case study.

See the full jupyter notebook code project and analysis in the file: PA11_1_Used_Car_pricing_final.ipynb
The file contains conclusions and recommendations to the client.

  My client is a used cars dealership. I analyzed a large dataset of over 400,000 used cars details, 
  to come up with a data prepared for a linear 
  Regression model - a multiple regression, as there are many features.
  After cleaning (and filling some) missing values, the dataset's size for modeling was: 272037 entries, 13 features 
  (of them 3 are numeric and the rest categorical), and a numeric target - price, column.


  In the attached Jupyter Notebook: PA11_1_Used_Car_pricing_final.ipynb, you can see the entire technical work: data inspection, 
   data exploration, preparation, modeling, and conclusions.

  PA11_1_Used_Car_pricing_final.ipynb Sections are:

  - Import Data
  - Data Inspection 
  - EDA, Data Cleaning, Filling Missing Values 
      Filling missing values
      Removing outliers.
      Histograms of numeric data.
  - Exploring Categorical Features - Data Preparation: Data Cleaning and Engineering.
      Cleaning missing values
      Crosstab of features, and using it to fill missing values.
      Bar and Boxplots to explore categorical data, plus correlation to the price (target column).
      Engineering condition, region and state columns. 
      Engineering model feature to be represented by model frequency.
 - Prepare dataset for Modeling
 - Modeling: Multiple Regression. Including column transformer pipeline, and a gridSearchCV.
         Models used:
    1. Prepared dataset
    2. Dataset with the logarithm of the price column: that got the same score and mse.

 - Overview of the Dataset and Conclusions: Recommendations to the client.

   The used cars dataset is very large and can give a lot of insights to what drives a car's price
- The dataset consists of a few numeric (odometer, year) features and mostly categorical features like: condition, title status, type, size, 
number of cylinders, paint color, manufacturer, model and region. A categorical feature like condition was turned into ordinal (numeric).
- The dataset is very large. Data preparation included filling and cleaning missing values, cleaning outliers, feature engineering so columns 
like region and state were represented numerical according to their correlation with each of their unique value with their median price.
- A special challenge was to represent a categorical column like model, that consists of thousands of unique values. 
This column was not included in the data that went into the model. Manufacturer feature has about 40 unique values, and a preliminary data 
inspection shown it to be correlated with the price.

Results:

Multiple Regression GridSearch, Test score:  0.50373

Sorted model coefficients, top 20:


         Coef name	                     value
__________________________________________________________________
	manufacturer_gmc	      	81779.720240
	manufacturer_buick	      	22680.381392
	manufacturer_volvo	      	13919.508798
	manufacturer_fiat	      	13809.978180
	cylinders_12 cylinders	      	13062.256464
	fuel_hybrid	              	12541.242305
	manufacturer_harley-davidson	-10749.557209
	manufacturer_saturn	       	10329.357344
	drive_rwd            	       	8924.087335
	manufacturer_infiniti		-8819.676433
	manufacturer_toyota	   	-8313.829542
	manufacturer_porsche 		-8183.114888
	type_SUV	              	 7659.534457
	title_status_salvage	   	7360.567671
	manufacturer_lincoln	   	-6968.247888
	type_convertible	      	6798.599927
	manufacturer_ferrari	   	-6783.074811
	manufacturer_jeep	      	-6627.962707
	manufacturer_mini	      	-6584.227939
	manufacturer_ram	      	-6359.719321
   
   
   Multiple Regression GridSearch, Log(Target), Test score:  0.50373
   
   Summary and Findings
   
The multiple regression model was found to have a very good predictive power, with a small Test set MSE of 0.5037. 
Out of all the various features of a used car, such as year manufactured, odometer read, paint color,manufacturer, condition, number of cylinders, fuel type, drive, and type, the most influential on car price were a few car manufacturers. Out of top 10 factors that increases a used car price, top 4 were manufacturers. Other features of used car that has a lot of influence on its price are: cylinders_12 cylinders, fuel_hybrid, manufacturer_saturn, drive_rwd, type_SUV, and title_status: salvage.
Top 4 manufacturers to increase a used car price: manufacturer_gmc, manufacturer_buick, manufacturer_volvo, manufacturer_fiat.
Top 7 features that inversely affect a used car price: manufacturer_harley-davidson manufacturer_harley-davidson manufacturer_infiniti manufacturer_toyota manufacturer_porsche manufacturer_lincoln manufacturer_ferrari manufacturer_jeep
My reccomendation for car dealers is to look out after market demand and find those car brands in high demands to get better sales. GMC, Buick, Volvo, and Fiat seem like a sought after car brands.


Next Steps

This model together with its data preparation methods are not done yet. I recommend to further explore how treating missing values differently, and including the model feature as a category can change the model predictions and features importance. I also recommend to explore how leaving out outliers like very old cars (cars older than 25 years) can influence the model predictive power. Used car 25 years old and under are the majority of the market, and very old/antique cars might have rules of their own.

 
